---
title: ""
url: https://commandcenter.blogspot.com/2006/06/i-cant-find-this-on-web-so-here.html
published: "2006-06-11T13:17:00-07:00"
feed: robpike
guid: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-6983287.post-108698514063518428
---

# 

I can't find this on the web, so here follows a note I wrote in 1991

of an odd event in my computing career.

===

There's no such thing as bad publicity, the saying goes.

Unless, of course, you have no interest in being a public figure.

That's where Richard Stallman and I start to diverge.

A friend called early Saturday to report some good news; groggily,

I countered with a feeling of impending doom. I had to spend the

day preparing for a talk Monday afternoon at MIT. The talk itself

would be fine: I'd been invited by Butler Lampson to talk about Plan 9

at the Lab for Computer Science and took that as the kind of honor

I rise to. I'd give a hell of talk, provided I was allowed to.

The problem, I said, is that MIT and I are connected by some history.

I explained about The League for Programming Freedom,

just the \`League' to insiders, whose multiply ambiguous name

hearkens to an innocent age in software. Free Software is

like Free Love, a hippie pipe dream in which

computing is free from venality, commercial interests, even

capitalism. The founder of the League, Richard Stallman,

has been preaching the gospel of promiscuous programming

for years now and has won many converts, especially

in academia. Especially at MIT. Especially among the undergraduates.

Especially in the building on Technology Square in Cambridge that

the League shares, in part, with LCS.

Stallman's sermons, in print and in person, always include a

long harangue about patents on software. The citation in that

harangue is usually #4,555,755, AT&T's US patent on what is

colloquially called \`\`backing store,'' a technique for implementing

windows on a bitmap display. This patent is of particular interest

to Stallman because he claims to have used the idea, before the patent

was filed, while writing the window system for the

Lisp Machine at MIT. The patent is of interest to me because I am

listed as the inventor.

I don't wish to dive into the legal and technical intricacies of

the patent question here. I will just state that I know what I

invented and when I invented it, and I know what Stallman did and

when he did it, and I do not believe that Stallman had nearly as

good an idea as I did. And as for the propriety of software

patents, I signed a contract when I joined AT&T that said, in

effect, that I could work on whatever I fancied and would be

supported well in that endeavor; all AT&T asked in return was that

they be allowed to make money from my work. In Stallman's

world that is a Faustian deal, but then I always thought only

boring people went to Heaven.

When the patent was filed (October 7, 1982; issued

November 26, 1985), there were very few software patents and

the occasion was celebrated. I was congratulated warmly and

people were excited about the future of software patents.

Nowadays, however, the climate in universities at least is

very different, and Richard Stallman is almost single-handedly

responsible for the change. (The business community, on the other

hand, is still excited.)

A few years ago, AT&T began quietly pressing its case on a small

portfolio of computer graphics patents, with #4,555,775 being central.

Polite letters were written to a number of places inviting people

to draw up license agreements; polite letters were returned, and

legalities proceeded normally. (I don't know, and wouldn't say if

I did, what the state of those legalities is today.) One of the

letters went to the X consortium at MIT, where it was largely

ignored. A follow-up letter early in 1991 hit the electronic

bulletin boards, however, and I have been a public figure ever

since.

I hung up and began preparing for the worst. Stallman and I had

never met, and I felt sure he'd capitalize on my visit to his

building.

I was therefore not surprised early Monday afternoon, as we were eating

a takeout lunch in the fifth-floor lounge at LCS, when someone

said that Stallman was preparing to stage a protest at my talk.

Jerry Saltzer went to his office to get a copy of the announcement,

made on a local LCS electronic bulletin board:

\-\-\-

Date: Sun, 17 Nov 91 20:26:37 -0500

From: Richard Stallman

To: bboard@lcs.mit.edu

Subject: Protest the AT&T backing store patent, Monday afternoon

You may have heard that AT&T has a patent on a simple technique called

"backing store" which consists of saving the hidden parts of a window

in off-screen memory. AT&T is using this patent to threaten to sue

all the users of X windows, including MIT. A few weeks ago, the X

consortium stated that these threats are "chilling to university

research".

Rob Pike, who obtained this patent for AT&T, is going to be visiting

Tech Square on Monday afternoon. If you don't like AT&T's

monopolistic threat, now's the time to express your opinion by joining

in a quiet protest against his visit.

Let's meet on the fourth floor of 545 Tech Square, near room 430,

around 2:15pm.

Please make a sign, even an el-cheapo sign, to identify yourself as

part of the protest. Make up a slogan on the subject of Pike, AT&T,

backing store, X windows, patents..., then write it with a magic

marker on a piece of copier paper.

(Pike has spoken publicly in favor of software patents and the backing

store patent in particular. He is thus not a reluctant participant in

AT&T's campaign of threats.)

\-\-\-

This notice has some characteristic inaccuracies, of which the worst

is that AT&T has never threatened to sue anyone over the patent,

but I love it anyway. The penultimate paragraph typifies Stallman

as only Stallman himself can. I asked if Stallman really believed

that people needed instructions on how to make signs. I was told

that among MIT undergraduates a bizarre form of political correctness

had developed, putting Stallman in charge of a pack of eager

misguided nerds who in a healthier environment would probably

be protesting the killing of rats in biology class.

My hosts at LCS were mortified. Stallman had staged a protest

at a company (to complain about Lotus's \`\`look and feel'' lawsuit),

but had never picketed a technical talk. Moreover, I was the

guest of LCS, not the League, had been invited to give this talk,

and was planning to give a technical lecture, not a legal debate,

on a topic unrelated to patents. There was even a suggestion

about examining the MIT code to see what it said about freedom

of speech. But then someone pointed out that

Stallman, for all his eccentricities (don't get me started) was

polite, and if he wanted a \`quiet' protest it would be quiet, and

I agreed.

A wag remarked that in the cloistered MIT world, participating

in a demonstration like this would be a broadening experience.

I was admonished not to talk to the protesters, not to answer

any questions about patents, and to let one of my hosts deflect

any verbal missile hurled at me. I replied that I had expected

as much and was prepared. For example, I was wearing a Bugs Bunny

T-shirt rather than a three-piece suit; I am a researcher more

than an AT&T Ambassador, to quote a giveaway pencil from a few

years back.

I needed to go to the lecture room early to prepare a laptop and

overhead projector for a brief demo during my talk. Because of

a scheduling conflict, the room was not a classroom but a sort

of playroom full of bean bags and not enough chairs.

I quickly identified the protesters: they were the ones in the back

with hand-written slogans on pieces of copier paper taped to their

chests. \`\`We don't back AT&T's Store of Patents,'' was perhaps

the most creative sign, except for a woman in a wheelchair with a

large placard reading, \`\`Patents Cripple Software.'' I looked

twice to verify that she needed the wheelchair. I tried to meet

Stallman's gaze but he would only steal surreptitious sideways

glances as he nervously paced back and forth in front of his

entourage.

My equipment set up easily, so I sat down in a reserved chair

in the front row to await the starting time and began chatting

to someone from LCS. Someone tapped my shoulder. I turned to

see a sign-encrusted protester. Physical contact. I braced myself.

He spoke.

\- Excuse me, would you mind moving? I won't be able to see the screen.

\- Don't worry, I'm giving the talk so I'll be moving all through it.

\- Fine. Thanks.

He sat down. At that moment, I finally relaxed with the realization

that nothing ugly was going to happen.

And nothing did. The talk went very well; I was pleased with the

story I told, a technical explanation of how distributed applications

are built in Plan 9 using its namespace operations (patent applied for).

The protesters were surprised, I think, that my subject was interesting

to them. At one point they all applauded spontaneously when I described

a feature of the system. I also think they were surprised that the

inventor of #4,555,755 was funny, theatrical, and clever. At least

half the questions (all technical) during and after the talk were from

the protesters. Stallman said nothing.

Afterwards an LCS member said that, as a result of Stallman's ploy,

my audience was about twice what it would have been. The people

he dragged in came for political reasons but ended up learning

something.

Here's what the League's newsletter said about the event:

\-\-\-

CAMBRIDGE, MA, November 18, 1991 -- Rob Pike, a software designer

from AT&T Bell Labs, expected to deliver an ordinary seminar on

his latest research project. Instead, he found a room filled

with programmers carrying signs to protest the consequences of

his previous project: the AT&T "backing store" patent which AT&T

has used to threaten all the members of the X Consortium,

including MIT itself.

Of the approximately 80 people present at the talk, about 50

carried protest signs. The protestors (sic) did not try to interfere

with the seminar. They simply raised their signs as Pike began

to speak. This accomplished the purpose of making their ire known.

\-\-\-

I accomplished my purpose of delivering a \`\`seminar on \[my\] latest

research project.'' Other than being a good talk, it was also,

in the end, pretty ordinary.
