---
title: "A New Solution of Dijkstra's Concurrent Programming Problem"
url: https://lamport.azurewebsites.net/pubs/bakery.pdf
published: "1974-08-01T00:00:00Z"
feed: lamport
guid: https://lamport.azurewebsites.net/pubs/bakery.pdf
---

# A New Solution of Dijkstra's Concurrent Programming Problem

6. Conclusion It has been s h o w n t h a t the existence o f a a - c o l o r a t i o n o f a p a r t i c u l a r g r a p h is a necessary a n d sufficient c o n d i tion for t h e existence o f a s o l u t i o n to the class-teacher t i m e t a b l e p r o b l e m with u n a v a i l a b i l i t y c o n s t r a i n t s a n d p r e a s s i g n e d meetings. T h e k n o w l e d g e o f this necessary a n d sufficient c o n d i t i o n does n o t p r o v i d e an efficient a l g o r i t h m which can be a p p l i e d to an a r b i t r a r y timetable p r o b l e m in o r d e r to d e t e r m i n e the existence o f a solution. The necessary a n d sufficient c o n d i t i o n does, however, s h o w t h a t existing g r a p h c o l o r i n g a l g o r i t h m s [I, 6, 14, 15, 16] m a y be a p p l i e d to t i m e t a b l e p r o b l e m s with u n a v a i l a b i l i t y constraints a n d preassigned meetings. A c k n o w l e d g m e n t . T h e a u t h o r s w o u l d like to t h a n k

Computer

G . Bell, D. Siewiorek, a n d S.H. Fuller, E d i t o r s

A New Solution of Dijkstra's Concurrent Programming Problem Leslie Lamport Massachusetts Computer Associates, Inc.

the referees for their c o n s t r u c t i v e criticism a n d helpful suggestions for the i m p r o v e m e n t o f this p a p e r . Received July 1973; revised February 1974

References 1. Corneil, D.G., and Graham, B. An algorithm for determining the chromatic number of a graph. S l A M J. on Computing 2, 4 (Dec. 1973), 311-318. 2. Csima, J., and Gotlieb, C.C. A computer method for constructing school time-tables. Presented at ACM 18th Ann. Conf., 1963. 3. Dernpster, M.A.H. On the Gotlieb-Csima time-tabling algorithm. Canadian J. Math. 20, 103-119. 4. Dempster, M.A.H. Two algorithms for the time-table problem. In Combinatorial Mathematics and Its Applications (D.J.A. Welsh, Ed.), Academic Press, London, 1969, pp. 63-85. 5. De Werra, D. Construction of school timetables by flow methods, lnfor. 1, 1, 12-22. 6. Formby, J.A. Computer procedure for bounding the chromatic number of a graph. In Combinatorial Mathematics and Its Applications (D.J.A. Welsh, Ed.), Academic Press, London, 1969, pp. 111-114. 7. Gotlieb, C.C. The construction of class-teacher time-tables. Proc. IFIP Congress 62, Munich, North Holland Pub. Co., Amsterdam, 1963, pp. 73-77. 8. Lions, J. Matrix reduction using the Hungarian method for the construction of school timetables. Comm. ACM. 9, 5 (May 1966), 349-354. 9. Lions, J. A counter-example for Gotlieb's method for the construction of school timetables. Comm. A C M 9, 9 (Sept. 1966), Letters to the Editor, 697-698. 10. Liofis, J. A generalization of a method for the construction of class/teacher timetables. Inform. Proc. 68, Proc. IFIP Congress 1968, North Holland Pub. Co., Amsterdam, pp. 1377-1382. 11. Lions, J. The Ontario school scheduling program. Computer J. 10, (1967-68), 14-21. 12. Lions, J. Some results concerning the reduction of binary matrices. J. A C M 18, 3 (July 1971), 424-430. 13. Neufeld, G.A., and Tartar, J. Generalized graph colorations. S I A M J, of Applied Math (To appear). 14. Peck, J.E.L., and Williams, M,R. Algorithm 286, exam scheduling. Comm. ACM. 9, 6 (June 1966), 433-434. IS. Welsh, D.J.A., and Powell, M.B. An upper bound for the chromatic number of a graph and its application to timetabling problems. Computer J. 10, (1967-68) 85-86. 16. Williams, M.R. The coloring of very large graphs. Combinatorial Structures and Their Applications, Proc. Calgary Internat. Conf. on Combinatorial Structures and Their Application. Gordon and Breach, Calgary, Canada, June 1969, pp. 477-478.

A simple solution to the mutual exclusion problem is presented which allows the system to continue to operate despite the failure of any individual component. Key Words and Phrases: critical section, concurrent programming, multiprocessing, semaphores CR Categories: 4.32

Introduction K n u t h [1], deBruijn [2], a n d E i s e n b e r g a n d M c G u i r e [3] have given s o l u t i o n s to a c o n c u r r e n t p r o g r a m m i n g p r o b l e m originally p r o p o s e d a n d solved by D i j k s t r a [4]. A simpler s o l u t i o n using s e m a p h o r e s has also been imp l e m e n t e d [5]. These s o l u t i o n s h a v e one d r a w b a c k for use in a true m u l t i c o m p u t e r system (rather t h a n a times h a r e d m u l t i p r o c e s s o r s y s t e m ) : the failure o f a single unit will halt the entire system. W e present a simple solut i o n which allows the system'*t~b c o n t i n u e to o p e r a t e despite the failure o f a n y i n d i v i d u a l c o m p o n e n t . General permission to republish, but not for profit, all or part of this material is granted provided that ACM's copyright notice is given and that reference is made to the publication, to its date of issue, and to the fact that reprinting privileges were granted This research was supported by the Advanced Research Projects Agency of the Department of Defense and was monitored by U.S. Army Research Office--Durham, under Contract No. DAHC04-70-C-O023. Author's address: Massachusetts Computer Associates, Inc., Lakeside Office Park, Wakefield, MA 01880. Communications of the ACM

August 1974 Number 8

The Algorithm Consider N asynchronous computers communicating with each other only via shared memory. Each computer runs a cyclic program with two p a r t s - - a critical section and a noncritical section. Dijkstra's problem, as extended by Knuth, is to write the programs so that the following conditions are satisfied: 1. At any time, at most one computer may be in its critical section. 2. Each computer must eventually be able to enter its critical section (unless it halts). 3. Any computer may halt in its noncritical section. Moreover, no assumptions can be made about the running speeds of the computers. The solutions of [1-4] had all N processors set and test the value of a single variable k. Failure of the memory unit containing k would halt the system. The use of semaphores also implies reliance upon a single hardware component. Our solution assumes N processors, each containing its own m e m o r y unit. A processor may read from any other processor's memory, b u t it need only write into its own memory. The algorithm has the remarkable property that if a read and a write operation to a single memory location occur simultaneously, then only the write operation must be performed correctly. The read may return any arbitrary value! A processor may fail at any time. We assume that when it fails, it immediately goes to its noncritical section and halts. There may then be a period when reading from its m e m o r y gives arbitrary values. Eventually, any read from its m e m o r y must give a value of zero. (In practice, a failed computer might be detected by its failure to respond to a read request within a specified length of time.) Unlike the solutions of [1-4], ours is a first-comefirst-served method in the following sense. When a processor wants to enter its critical section, it first executes a loop-free block of code--i.e, one with a fixed number of execution steps. It is then guaranteed to enter its critical section before any other processor which later requests service. The algorithm is quite simple. It is based upon one commonly used in bakeries, in which a customer receives a number upon entering the store. The holder of the lowest number is the next one served. In our algorithm, each processor chooses its own number. The processors are named 1, . . . , N. If two processors choose the same number, then the one with the lowest name goes first. The c o m m o n store consists of integer array chooshlg [1 :N], number [1 :N]

Words choosing (i) and number [i] are in the m e m o r y of processor i, and are initially zero. The range of values of number [i] is unbounded. This will be discussed below. The following is the program for processor i. Execution must begin inside the noncritical section. The argu454

ments of the m a x i m u m function can be read in any order. The relation "less t h a n " on ordered pairs of integers is defined by (a,b) < (c,d) if a < c, or if a = c and b < d . begin integer j; L1 : choosing [i] : = 1 ; number[i] : = 1 + maximum (number[l],..., number[N]); choosing[i] : = 0; forj = 1 step l until N do he~n L2: if choosing[j] ~ 0 then goto L2; L3: if number[j] ~ 0 and (number [j'],j) < (number[i], i) then goto L3;

end; critical section; number[i] : = O; noncritical section; goto L 1 ;

end

We allow processor i to fail at any time, and then to be restarted in its noncritical section (with choosing [i] = number [i] = 0). However, if a processor keeps failing and restarting, then it can deadlock the system.

Proof of Correctness To prove the correctness of the algorithm, we first make the following definitions. Processor i is said to be in the doorway while choosing [i] = 1. It is said to be in the bakery from the time it resets choosing (i) to zero until it either fails or leaves its critical section. The correctness of the algorithm is deduced from the following assertions. Note that the proofs make no assumptions about the value read during an overlapping read and write to the same m e m o r y location. Assertion 1. If processors i and k are in the bakery and i entered the bakery before k entered the doorway, then number [i] < number [k]. Proof. By hypothesis, number [i] had its current value while k was choosing the current value of number [k]. Hence, k must have chosen number [k] >_ 1 + number [/].IS] Assertion 2. If processor i is in its critical section, processor k is in the bakery, and k ~ i, then (number [i], i) < (number [k], k). Proof. Since choosing [k] has essentially just two values--zero and n o n z e r o - - w e can assume that from processor i's point of view, reading or writing it is done instantaneously, and a simultaneous read and write does not occur. For example, if choosing [k] is being changed from zero to one while it is also being read by processor i, then the read is considered to happen first if it obtains a value of zero; otherwise the write is said to happen first. All times defined in the proof are from processor i's viewpoint. Let tL2 be the time at which processor i read choosing [k] during its last execution of L2 f o r j = k, and let tL3 be the time at which i began its last execution of L3 for j = k, so tn~ < tL3. When processor k was choosing its Communications of the ACM

A u g u s t 1974 Number 8

current value of n u m b e r [k], let t~ be the time at which it entered the doorway, tw the time at which it finished writing the value of n u m b e r [k], and tc the time at which it left the doorway. Then t~ < tw < to. Since c h o o s i n g [k] was equal to zero at time tl.2, we have either (a) tL2 < t, or (b) tc < tL~. In case (a), Assertion 1 implies that n u m b e r [i] < n u m b e r [k], so the assertion holds. In c a s e ( b ) , w e h a v e t w < tc < tn2 < tL3, SOtw < tz~. Hence, duringthe execution of statement L3 begun at time tz3, processor i read the current value of n u m b e r [k]. Since i did not execute L3 again f o r j = k, it must have found ( n u m b e r [i], i) < ( n u m b e r [k], k). Hence, the assertion holds in this case, too.U] A s s e r t i o n 3. Assume that only a bounded number of processor failures may occur. If no processor is in its critical section and there is a processor in the bakery which does not fail, then some processor must eventually enter its critical section. P r o o f . Assume that no processor ever enters its critical section. Then there will be some time after which no more processors enter or leave the bakery. At this time, assume that processor i has the minimum value of ( n u m b e r [i], i) a m o n g all processors in the bakery. Then processor i must eventually complete the for loop and enter its critical section. This is the required contradiction. [] Assertion 2 implies that at most one processor can be in its critical section at any time. Assertions 1 and 2 p r o v e ' t h a t processors enter their critical sections on a first-come-first-served basis. Hence, an individual processor cannot be blocked unless the entire system is deadlocked. Assertion 3 implies that the system can only be deadlocked by a processor halting in its critical section, or by an unbounded sequence of processor failures and re-entries. The latter can tie up the system as follows. If processor j continually fails and restarts, then with bad luck processor i could always find c h o o s i n g [j] = 1, and loop forever at L2. Further Remarks

If there is always at least one processor in the bakery, then the value of n u m b e r [i] can become arbitrarily large. This problem cannot be solved by any simple scheme of cycling through a finite set of integers. For example, given any numbers r and s, if N :> 4, then it is possible to have simultaneously n u m b e r (i) = r and n u m b e r (j) = s for some i and j. Fortunately, practical considerations will place an upper bound on the value of n u m b e r [i] in any real application. For example, if processors enter the doorway at the rate of at most one per msec, then after a year of operation we will have n u m b e r [i] < 235--assuming that a read of n u m b e r [i] can never obtain a value larger than one which has been written there. The unboundedness of n u m b e r [i] does raise an inter1 We have recently found such an algorithm, but it is quite complicated.

esting theoretical question : can one find an algorithm for finite processors such that processors enter their critical sections on a first-come-first-served basis, and no processor may write into another processor's memory? The answer is not known. ~ The algorithm can be generalized in two ways: (i) under certain circumstances, to allow two processors simultaneously to be in their critical sections; and (ii) to modify the first-come-first-served property so that higher priority processors are served first. This will be described in a future paper. Conclusion

Our algorithm provides a new, simple solution to the mutual exclusion problem. Since it does not depend upon any form of central control, it is less sensitive to component failure than previous solutions. Received September 1973; revised January 1974 References

1. Knuth, D.E. Additional comments on a problem in concurrent programming control. Comm. Acre 9, 5 (May 1966), 321-322. 2. deBruijn, N.G. Additional comments on a problem in concurrent programming control Comm. A C M 10, 3 (Mar. 1967), 137-138. 3. Eisenberg, M.A., and McGuire, M.R. Further comments on Dijkstra's concurrent programming control problem. Comm. A C M 15, 11 (Nov. 1972), 999. 4. Dijkstra, E.W. Solution of a problem in concurrent programming control. Comm. A C M 8, 9 (Sept. 1965), 569. 5. Dijkstra, E.W. The structure of THE multiprogramming system. Comm. A C M 11, 5 (May 1968), 341-346. Computer Systems Erratum

In " A Note on Subexpression Ordering in the Evaluation of Arithmetic Expressions" by Peter J. Denning and G. Scott G r a h a m , C o m m . A C M 16, 11 (Nov. 1973), 700-702, the following erratum has been submitted by Denning. The first two sentences in the first full paragraph on p. 701 should read as follows: Hu shows that an optimal list L0 for any m and any tree (of equal-execution-time tasks) can be constructed by taking a first appearance of each task in the sequence M i x , M 2 . , . , . . . , MKK. R a m a m o o r t h y and Gonzales order the tasks of each M,j according to decreasing execution time, then construct a list L by taking the first appearance of each task in the sequence Mix, •

, M 1 K , M.,..,. , . . . , M.,_K , M33 , • • . , M 3 K , • • • , M K K ;

they claim that L is optimal for any tree and any m. It should be noted that even for equal-execution-time tasks, a list constructed from the latter sequence above need not be consistent with the former sequence above and, hence, need not be optimal for that reason alone. We are grateful to Dr. Shimon Even for calling our unfortunately incorrect wording to our attention. Communications of the ACM

August 1974 Number 8
