---
title: "A supplement to EWD1140 and EWD1171 (EWD1199)"
url: https://www.cs.utexas.edu/~EWD/transcriptions/EWD11xx/EWD1199.html
published: "1995-02-15T00:00:00Z"
feed: ewd
guid: https://www.cs.utexas.edu/~EWD/ewd11xx/EWD1199.PDF
---

# A supplement to EWD1140 and EWD1171

EWD 1199

A supplement to EWD1140 and EWD1171

In EWD1140 we proved that the arithmetic mean is at least the geometric mean; in EWD1171 we returned to that problem, including most of the heuristics. One rabbit, though, remained: the choice of c between x and y so that

(0) В  В  В  В  x,y := c, x+yвҲ’c

will decrease the distance between x and y. I know why the rabbit remained: in my first effort I hit upon a case analysis too ugly to include in my text, and so the coward waved his hands. (The case analysis was generated by the value of xВ <В y before and after.)

All this was a little bit stupid (and dishonest, but that is another story) since the whole argument вҖ”see the opening sentence of EWD1140вҖ” is built on the identity

(x+y)пҝҪ = (xвҲ’y)пҝҪ + 4пҝҪxпҝҪy

and instead of worrying about decreasing the distance between x and y, we should focus our attention to decreasing (xвҲ’y)пҝҪ.

The following simple calculation massages the initial condition under which (0) decreases (xвҲ’y)пҝҪВ В В :

(c вҲ’ (x+yвҲ’c))пҝҪ < (xвҲ’y)пҝҪ

= В  В  В  В  {algebra}

(2cвҲ’xвҲ’y)пҝҪ < (xвҲ’y)пҝҪ

= В  В  В  В  {algebra: a < b+c вүЎ aвҲ’b < c}

(2cвҲ’xвҲ’y)пҝҪ вҲ’ (xвҲ’y)пҝҪ < 0

= В  В  В  В  {algebra: aпҝҪвҲ’bпҝҪ = (aвҲ’b)(a+b)}

(2cвҲ’2x)(2cвҲ’2y) < 0

= В  В  В  В  {algebra}

(cвҲ’x)(cвҲ’y) < 0

which compactly and without case analysis characterizes the situation in which c lies between x and y.

For the modification chosen in EWD1171:

(1) В  В  В  В  x,y := c, вҖүxвҖүпҝҪ y/c

the analogous calculation leads to

(cпҝҪвҲ’xпҝҪ)пҝҪ(cпҝҪвҲ’yпҝҪ) < 0 В  В  В  ,

which is only equivalent toВ  (c вҲ’x)пҝҪ(cвҲ’y) < 0 В ifВ  (c+x)пҝҪ(c+y) > 0. The whole problem is in terms of positive numbers, so this condition is satisfied. The observation, however, confirms my impression that the choice of (0) in EWD1140 вҖ”i.e. increasing the product under constant sumвҖ” is to be preferred over the choice of (1) in EWD1171 вҖ”i.e. decreasing the sum under constant productвҖ”.

Austin, 15 February 1995

PS В  The algebra on the previous page is somewhat elaborate. It just shows how one is affected by lecturing for American undergraduates.

prof.dr. Edsger W.Dijkstra

Department of Computer Sciences

The University of Texas at Austin

Austin, TX 78712-1188

USA

transcribed by Corrado Cantelmi

revised
26-Dec-2011
