---
title: Discovering New Instructions
url: https://blog.regehr.org/archives/669
published: "2012-01-23T17:13:16Z"
feed: regehr
guid: http://blog.regehr.org/?p=669
---

# Discovering New Instructions

Sometimes I wonder what instruction sets are supposed to look like. That is, what instructions would there be if computers were redesigned by smart people who understood our fabrication capabilities and who knew what we wanted to accomplish using computers, but who didn’t care about backwards compatibility and who haven’t seen our architectures? We can get little glimpses into that world by looking at network processors, DSPs, GPUs, ISA extensions like [SSE4](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SSE4) and [NEON](http://www.arm.com/products/processors/technologies/neon.php), extensible processors like [Tensilica’s](http://www.tensilica.com/products/hw-sw-dev-tools/for-processor-designers.htm), and others. But still, these are too rooted in the past.

Although the machine code emitted by our compilers is inextricably tied to our processors, perhaps this code can still be leveraged to discover new instructions. As a thought experiment, let’s start with a collection of executables whose performance we care about. Preferably, some of these will have been compiled from programs in Haskell, OCaml, and other languages that are not well-represented in today’s benchmark suites. We’ll run these programs in a heavily instrumented execution environment that creates a dynamic dataflow graph for the computation; the excellent [Redux](http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download;jsessionid=7CE631B431BCCBA459061BC458D53E8F?doi=10.1.1.63.2083&rep=rep1&type=pdf) paper shows how this can be done. Next, we’ll need to clean up the dataflow graphs. First, we rewrite processor-specific operations (condition code dependencies, CISC instructions, etc.) into a simpler, portable form. Next, we optimize away as much dead, redundant, and vacuous code as possible; including, hopefully, all irrelevancies such as stack frame manipulation, dynamic linking, and garbage collection. The result — perhaps — will be something beautiful: the essence of the original computation, stripped of all sequential constraints, processor-specific operations, and bookkeeping. Of course this dataflow graph has some limitations. First, it only encodes the meaning of a single execution of the program. Second, it encodes a lot of incidental facts about the computation such as the bitwidths of all integer operations, the specific hashing methods used, etc. We’ll just have to live with these problems. The Redux paper contains a great example where factorial codes written in C, in Haskell, and in a stack machine are shown to all produce basically the same dataflow graph.

So now we have a collection of giant dataflow graphs: one for each execution of each program that we’re interested in. Our goal is to design an instruction set that can compute these dataflow graphs. Trivially, this can be done by partitioning the graphs into very small units of computation corresponding to a RISC instruction set. But that ISA is boring and won’t show any performance wins. To do better we’ll use a search-based strategy to find subgraphs that:

- occur a large number of times across the collection of dataflow graphs — these are operations that are executed frequently by our workloads
- contain a lot of parallelism — making them good candidates for hardware acceleration
- contain a lot of internal symmetry — supporting SIMD-style execution
- have a small number of dynamic inputs and outputs
- rely on a small number of constants
- do not contain dependency chains that are too long — we don’t want to create instructions that are too slow

I think this can be done; none of these properties seems particularly difficult to test for. The major problem necessitating cleverness will be the huge size of the dataflow graphs. We’ll end up with a list of candidate instructions ranked by some fitness function, such as performance or code density. We can build as many of these into our new ISA as we have hardware budget for.

Would this method discover saturating arithmetic instructions when applied to signal processing codes? Would it find clever ways to optimize bounds checks and exception handling in high-level programming programming languages? It’s possible (though I’d be super disappointed) that the new machines are just incidental variations on existing RISC and CISC designs. If this happened, I would suspect that we had failed to abstract away a sufficient number of processor artifacts. Or, perhaps it was a mistake to compile our computations to an existing machine architecture before building the dataflow graphs. Rather, perhaps we should start with a source-level program and its operational semantics, unrolling it into a dataflow graph without any compilation to machine code. This avoids ties to our existing processors, but also risks coming up with graphs that are very hard to map back onto actual hardware. Of course, many languages don’t even have a real semantics, but researchers are diligently working on that sort of thing. An even more difficult option would build up the functional representation of a source program (or executable) without running it, but this has the disadvantage of losing the “profile data” that is built into a dynamic dataflow graph — we’d need to add that in separately.

An aspect of this exercise that I find interesting is that gives insight into what our processors really do. Many years ago (I don’t have a reference handy, unfortunately) a study showed that computers spend most of their time in sorting algorithms. That cannot be true anymore — but what does the average mobile phone do? What about the average supercomputer chip? The average machine in Google or Amazon’s cloud? Of course we know the answers at a high level, but are there surprises lurking inside the computations? I would expect so — it’s tough to take a close look at a complicated system and not learn something new. Are there new instructions out there, waiting to be discovered, that can help these workloads execute more efficiently? I have to think so, at least for for workloads that are not well-represented in Intel’s, AMD’s, and ARM’s benchmark suites.
