---
title: EMSOFT 2012
url: https://blog.regehr.org/archives/816
published: "2012-10-12T18:49:36Z"
feed: regehr
guid: http://blog.regehr.org/?p=816
---

# EMSOFT 2012

I just got back from Tampere, Finland where I was one of the program chairs for EMSOFT, an embedded software conference. If I haven’t blogged about this much, it’s because I’m sort of a reluctant and not especially talented organizer of events. Happily, EMSOFT is just one third of the larger [Embedded Systems Week](http://www.esweek.org/), so logistics were handled at a higher level. Also happily, I had a co-chair Florence Maraninchi who did more than half of the work.

Visiting Finland was a pleasure; people were very friendly and the beer was good. On the other hand, Tampere wasn’t that easy to get to (~24 hours travel time from Salt Lake City) and my pessimistic expectations for October at 61°N were met: every day it was drizzly and not a lot above freezing. I saw the sun about once while in Finland, and by the time I left the days were noticeably shorter than when I arrived. I also hadn’t realized how far east Finland is: it’s only a four-hour drive from Helsinki to St. Petersburg. I found Finnish to be hilariously indecipherable, I hadn’t realized how much it differs from other European languages. I also hadn’t realized that everyone would just start speaking Finnish to me; apparently I fit in appearance-wise. Previously this has only happened to me in Germany and Holland. In general, however, everyone spoke perfectly acceptable English.

The conference was nice. Embedded software is a research area that I like a lot, though it can be a tricky one to appreciate due to a larger diversity of research approaches compared to other areas. For example, my view of [OS research](https://blog.regehr.org/archives/798) is that there’s a shared view for how to approach problems, even if there is a lot of variety in the actual problems being attacked. Embedded software isn’t like that. One of the topics we’ve started to see at embedded software conferences that I really like is looking at the robustness of software from the point of view of ensuring that bounded changes in inputs lead to bounded changes of outputs. This isn’t a notion that makes sense for all kinds of software, but it can be applied for example to feedback controllers and some kinds of signal processing codes. Robust control is an old idea but applying the technique to actual software is new. I’ve long believed that the lack of sensitivity analyses for software is a problem, so it’s great to see this actually being done.
