---
title: xv6
url: https://blog.regehr.org/archives/1114
published: "2014-04-08T22:43:04Z"
feed: regehr
guid: http://blog.regehr.org/?p=1114
---

# xv6

I’m teaching a small Advanced Operating Systems course this spring. Preparing for the course over winter break, I spent some time reading various Linux subsystems such as the scheduler, and was a bit shocked at how complex it has become. I’ve been using Linux, looking at its code, and occasionally hacking it for more than 20 years, and it seems that my impression of it as a fairly simple, easy-to-follow kernel has become badly out of date. It’s not that [this glorious 7991-line file](https://github.com/torvalds/linux/blob/master/kernel/sched/core.c) is impossible to understand, but rather that it — along with the other 16,000 lines of code in the `kernel/sched` directory — isn’t obviously the correct thing to inflict on some undergrads who are interested enough in operating systems to take a second course.

While looking around for alternatives I tried out [xv6](http://pdos.csail.mit.edu/6.828/2012/xv6.html), which I had known about for a while but hadn’t looked at closely. xv6 is a rewrite of v6 UNIX in modern C that runs on multicore x86 chips. It compiles in a couple of seconds and is trivial to boot up in QEMU. It took me a while to see the genius of xv6, which is that it is simpler than I would have thought a working multicore OS with shell and filesystem could be. For example, it lacks wait queues and ready queues — in xv6, both wakeup and scheduling are accomplished by looping over the all-process table. Similarly, there’s no malloc() in the kernel, but rather just a page allocator. The pipe implementation copies one byte at a time. Amazingly, even the bootloader is a pleasure to read. Another nice thing about xv6 is that it comes with [a short textbook](http://pdos.csail.mit.edu/6.828/2012/xv6/book-rev7.pdf) that explains OS concepts in terms of their implementations in xv6.

So what did we do with xv6 beside read it? One exercise was to speed up its pipe implementation as much as possible while preserving UNIX semantics. This turned out to be a really nice exercise (I thought). It is fairly easy to get within a factor of two of Linux pipe throughput on a two-core VM. We implemented a ring buffer for zero-copy bulk data transfer between processes. Finally, we added priorities and ready queues.

I have no real complaints about xv6: the code is clean and commented, the functions are small, and overall it makes a great instructional OS. The look and feel are very similar to what I remember from hacking on Minix when I took an advanced OS class around 1994. Actually I do have one small complaint, which is that in a few places liberties are taken with error checking. For example, in the allocuvm() function from vm.c, which grows a process, there is a call to mappages() that mysteriously fails to check the return value. Is there some reason that this particular call cannot fail? If so, a comment explaining the reasoning is needed. If not, error checking is required. I’m sensitive about this issue since I tell the students over and over that they cannot ignore failures in this kind of code.

Another OS that we’ve been learning from is the Windows 2000 kernel which is — surprisingly, to many people — a simple and elegant multicore OS that provides some real-world contrast to xv6’s over-simplicity. I haven’t seen any Windows kernels later than 2000, I’d be curious to hear if they have remained so nice.
